Shifting from One-Time Education to Continuous
Growth: A Dual-Process Cognitive Architecture
Integrating System One Decision Models and
Generative Socratic Tutors for Adaptive Lifelong
Learning
Harshith D. , Aman Goud D., Surya Teja P., and Ramya N.
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Institute of Aeronautical Engineering, Hyderabad, India
Email: {23951A052X, 23951A050K, 24955A0537, n.ramya}@iare.ac.in

Abstract—Traditional higher and professional education follows an episodic, front-loaded paradigm in which foundational
degrees are earned early in life with little continuous adaptation.
In modern technological ecosystems this static model causes
rapid skill obsolescence, workforce dislocation, and educational
inequity. This paper presents the Dual-Process Adaptive Learning
System (DP-ALS), a theoretical and cyber-physical architecture
for continuous, lifelong education. Drawing on dual-process cognitive theory, DP-ALS separates educational intervention into two
components: (i) a low-latency System One decision model (design
target under 40 ms) that acts as a continuous reflex engine,
monitoring learner micro-telemetry to track cognitive load, flow
state, and productive struggle through a partially observable
Markov decision process (POMDP); and (ii) a deliberate System
Two generative AI tutor invoked asynchronously only when an
impasse is detected or deep conceptual synthesis is required.
We formalize the System One / System Two coordination loop
and report, in agent-based simulation, an 84.6% reduction in
LLM token consumption relative to a monolithic LLM tutor, an
85.3% reduction in cognitive impasse, and a 61.6% reduction in
time-to-mastery relative to a static curriculum. The framework
is mapped to UN Sustainable Development Goals 4, 8, 9, and
10 and to Washington Accord knowledge profiles and program
outcomes.
Index Terms—adaptive learning systems, System One decision
models, generative AI, dual-process theory, intelligent tutoring
systems, lifelong education, POMDP

I. I NTRODUCTION
Modern economic, industrial, and social systems are shaped
by non-linear technological acceleration, and the half-life of
a learned skill is now commonly put at about five years,
falling to as little as 2.5 years in fast-moving sectors such
as IT and data analysis [1]. Yet education remains episodic
and front-loaded: individuals undergo intensive credentialing
between roughly ages 18 and 25, followed by ad hoc, fragmented professional upskilling. This mismatch undermines
the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs)
[2], [3], notably SDG 4 (Quality Education and Lifelong
Learning), SDG 8 (Decent Work and Economic Growth),

SDG 9 (Industry, Innovation, and Infrastructure), and SDG 10
(Reduced Inequalities).
Intelligent tutoring systems (ITS) have sought to bridge this
gap [4], but existing approaches face a dichotomy:
1) Classical ITS (rule-based, BKT, IRT). Systems built
on Bayesian knowledge tracing (BKT) [5] and item
response theory (IRT) execute deterministically and with
low latency, but rely on brittle pedagogical heuristics,
perform no semantic synthesis, and cannot generate
contextual metaphors for diverse adult learners.
2) Monolithic generative LLM tutors. Transformer-based
[6] large language models (LLMs) support rich Socratic
dialogue, but they respond slowly (across 147 models
in one cross-provider feed, median first-answer latency
ranges from 0.42 s to over 700 s, and frontier reasoning
models typically take tens of seconds or more [7]),
incur prohibitive token costs, and tend to over-assist.
Unguarded use of a generative tutor can reduce later unaided performance [8], and premature over-explanation
ends the learner’s “productive struggle” and disrupts the
state of cognitive flow [9].
To resolve this dichotomy we propose a Dual-Process Adaptive Learning System (DP-ALS). Following the human dualprocess architecture [10], it couples a fast, reflexive System
One decision model with an asynchronous, deliberate System Two generative Socratic engine. This paper presents the
theoretical foundation, the POMDP formulation, the system
architecture, a simulation-based evaluation, and the alignment
with accreditation frameworks.
II. T HEORETICAL F OUNDATION
A. Dual-Process Theory in Pedagogy
Kahneman’s framework posits two modes of cognition [10]:
•

System One (autonomous reflex): fast, parallel, computationally light, non-conscious, and reactive.

System Two (deliberate reasoning): slow, serial, computationally intensive, analytical, and rule-governed.
An expert human tutor does not deliberate over complex
pedagogy at every keystroke. Rather, the tutor’s System One
registers subtle cues, such as a furrowed brow, a sudden
hesitation, typing jitter, or a steady rhythm, and System Two
engages only when an impasse is sensed. DP-ALS reproduces
this division of labor computationally.
•

B. The System One Reflex Engine
The System One component is a low-latency decision
head. Rather than relying on hosted, high-latency generative APIs, we model it on an edge-deployable, open-weight
structured-decision encoder, specifically Fastino’s 340Mparameter GLiNER2.5-Decide [11]. That model takes text
and a schema of typed questions and returns, in a single
encoder pass and without autoregressive decoding, a selected
answer with probabilities and confidence scores. In DP-ALS
the telemetry state is serialized into the text input (alternatively,
the model can be fine-tuned on telemetry-derived states), and
the typed question asks which pedagogical action to take.
System One thus acts as a high-frequency classifier and action
router (Fig. 1),
πSystem One : Ht × xt −→ A,

(1)

where xt is the real-time client telemetry vector, Ht is
a compact summary of the learner’s cognitive history, and
A = {a0 , a1 , a2 , a3 , a4 } is a set of discrete, low-latency
pedagogical interventions. The design target is System One
inference in under 40 ms, so that interventions can synchronize
with the learner’s motor-cognitive actions. Fastino reports
median end-to-end latencies, at batch size 1 and 64 tokens,
of 38.3 ms on a V100 GPU, 43–47 ms on T4, L4, and
A100 GPUs, and 167.3 ms on a 48-vCPU server CPU [11].
The target therefore presumes a server-class GPU close to
the learner, and the latency figures in this paper come from
simulation.
III. M ATHEMATICAL F ORMULATION
A. Telemetry State Space
Let the learner interaction stream at time step t be a multimodal feature vector xt ∈ Rd :
[︁
]︁T
xt = ∆τk , Hk , σscroll , esyntax , tdwell , rchurn ,
(2)
where ∆τk is inter-keystroke latency, Hk is the Shannon
entropy of input-interval cadence, σscroll is viewport jitter,
esyntax is the count of immediate compilation or validation
errors, tdwell is static dwell duration, and rchurn is the rapidretry frequency.
The latent cognitive state st ∈ S is a four-dimensional
vector,
⎡
⎤
Ct
⎢ Ft ⎥
3
⎥
st = ⎢
(3)
⎣Mt ⎦ ∈ [0, 1] × [−1, 1],
Pt

whose components are cognitive load Ct , flow-state probability
Ft , competency mastery belief Mt , and productive struggle
index Pt .
B. POMDP Cognitive State Filtering
Because st is not directly observable, the problem is a
partially observable Markov decision process [12], and the
System One engine maintains a belief distribution b(st ) updated by recursive Bayesian filtering, where P (xt | st ) is the
observation model and T is the transition model:
∫︂
b(st ) ∝ P (xt | st ) T (st | st−1 , at−1 ) b(st−1 ) dst−1 . (4)
S

The productive struggle index follows Cognitive Load Theory
[13]:
(︁
)︁
Pt = tanh ω1 Mt − ω2 (Ct − C ∗ ) ,
(5)
where ω1 , ω2 > 0 are weights and C ∗ ≈ 0.65 is the optimal
zone of proximal cognitive challenge. If Pt > 0 the learner is
in productive difficulty; if Pt ≪ 0 the struggle has degenerated
into frustrating impasse.
C. Action Space and Policy Optimization
The System One policy selects one of five mutually exclusive actions:
• a0 (passive flow): no UI interruption; preserve immersion.
• a1 (ambient nudge): a subtle syntax or typographic highlight (visual cue under 15 ms).
• a2 (IRT complexity shift): adjust item difficulty β under
a dynamic IRT model,
P (Y = 1 | θt , β) =

1
,
1 + e−Dκ(θt −β)

(6)

where θt is learner ability, κ is item discrimination, and
D is a scaling constant.
• a3 (dispatch System Two): send an enriched diagnostic
packet to the Socratic LLM.
• a4 (cognitive rest): insert a micro-pause or spacedrepetition retrieval exercise.
The policy maximizes expected cumulative discounted pedagogical return while penalizing compute cost and flow disruption:
T
[︂∑︂
(︁
J(πSystem One ) = E
γ t ∆Mt + α1 Ft
t=0

)︁]︂
− λ 1{at =a3 } Φcost − α2 Dt ,
(7)
where γ ∈ (0, 1) is the discount factor, α1 , α2 , λ ≥ 0 are tradeoff weights, Φcost is the relative compute cost of a System Two
invocation, and Dt is the penalty for unnecessary interruption
during flow.
IV. S YSTEM A RCHITECTURE
The platform has five cooperating components.

telemetry
(50 ms stream)
micro-nudge
(fast reflex)

Learner interface
and client telemetry
keystroke entropy
response latency
scroll and UI jitter

System One: Reflex engine
(GLiNER2.5-Decide
edge model)
latency target under 40 ms
cognitive load tracking
POMDP routing, micronudges, IRT pacing

skill updates

Lifelong knowledge graph
and Skill Passport
dynamic competencies
micro-credentials
SDG, WK, and PO mastery

impasse detected:
dispatch System Two

Socratic guidance
(async stream)

System Two: Socratic GenAI
(deliberate LLM engine)
Socratic dialogue
conceptual remediation
personalized analogies

assessment

Fig. 1. Dual-process architecture. Telemetry flows into the fast System One decision engine (latency target under 40 ms) for micro-scaffolding, which routes
to the System Two LLM only upon cognitive impasse. Both systems update the learner’s lifelong skill record.

A. Edge Telemetry Pipeline

Algorithm 1 Dual-Process Cognitive Loop (DP-ALS)

A lightweight JavaScript worker samples browser interaction signals every 50 ms. To comply with privacy regulations
(GDPR/FERPA), keystroke contents are never captured. Only
statistical entropy, timing offsets ∆τ , and cursor accelerations
are computed client-side and sent as anonymous tensor embeddings.

Require: telemetry stream xt ; thresholds τflow , τP , τimpasse ,
τfatigue ; tolerance δ; target success probability p∗ ; System Two
cooldown Tcool
Ensure: action at ∈ A and belief b(st ) at every step
1: b(s0 ) ← prior; pending ← false; tlast ← −∞
2: while session active, every ∆t = 50 ms do
3:
Receive xt {Eq.
(︁ (2)}
)︁
4:
b(st ) ← filter b(st−1 ), at−1 , xt {Eq. (4)}
5:
(Ct , Ft , Mt , Pt ) ← Eb(st ) [st ] {Eqs. (3), (5)}
6:
if Ct ≥ τimpasse or Pt < τP then
7:
if not pending and t − tlast ≥ Tcool then
8:
at ← a3 ; Γ ← ⟨b(st ), ErrorTrace, SkillGraph⟩
9:
Send Γ to System Two asynchronously; pending ←
true; tlast ← t
10:
else
11:
at ← a0 {System Two reply pending; do not interrupt}
12:
end if
13:
else if ∆τk > τfatigue then
14:
at ← a4 {cognitive rest}
15:
else if Ft ≥ τflow and Pt ≥ 0 then
16:
at ← a0 {passive flow}
17:
else if esyntax > 0 then
18:
at ← a1 {ambient nudge}
19:
else if Pt < 0 or Ct < C ∗ −∗ δ /︁then
p
20:
at ← a2 ; β ← θ̂t − ln 1−p
∗ (Dκ) {Eq. (6)}
21:
else
22:
at ← a 0
23:
end if
24: end while
25: on System Two reply: stream the Socratic dialogue to the client
sidebar; pending ← false

B. System One Reflex Gateway
Telemetry vectors stream over binary WebSockets to an
edge-deployed System One inference server running an openweight decision model of the GLiNER2.5-Decide class. The
simulated end-to-end round-trip latency is 28.4 ± 4.2 ms,
which assumes optimization beyond the published single-GPU
latency of 38.3 ms [11]. At each step the gateway evaluates
the POMDP state and issues micro-nudges or adjusts client
UI state without server-side rendering delays.
C. System Two Socratic Deliberation Engine
When System One fires a3 , an asynchronous RPC payload
is built from (a) the learner’s demographic and professional
background, (b) the targeted knowledge-graph node, (c) the
empirical error trace, and (d) the diagnosed misconception signature. The System Two LLM then generates targeted, personalized Socratic questions, for example relating a distributedconsensus algorithm to a supply-chain manager’s inventorybalancing experience.
D. Lifelong Competency Graph and Skill Passport
Continuous growth is recorded in an immutable, graphbased Skill Passport. Mastery is re-evaluated through spaceddecay functions, which encourages micro-credentials and ongoing upskilling.
E. Algorithmic Coordination
Client telemetry, System One reflex decisions, and System
Two deliberation are coordinated by the procedure in Algorithm 1. Fig. 1 shows the resulting data flow.

Rules are evaluated in priority order, so each step selects
exactly one action. An impasse takes precedence over flow
protection, because a high load Ct can coexist with a nonnegative Pt when mastery belief is high. The pending flag
and the cooldown Tcool prevent a new System Two request
from being issued at every 50 ms tick while a reply is in
flight. For action a2 , solving Eq. (6) for β at P (Y =1) = p∗
sets the next item so that the predicted success probability

TABLE I
B ENCHMARK C OMPARISON ACROSS 10,000 S IMULATED L EARNER
T RAJECTORIES
Architecture

TTM (h) Impasse (%) Tokens/h Flow (%)

Static curriculum
Rule-based ITS
LLM-only (System Two)
DP-ALS (ours)

48.5
39.2
28.4
18.6

42.1
31.8
19.5
6.2

0
120
48,200
7,400

31.4
44.6
52.1
78.9

equals the target, where θ̂t is the current ability estimate. The
thresholds τflow = 0.70, τP = −0.4, and τimpasse = 0.75
match the values used in Fig. 2 and Appendix B. Because
Pt > 0 whenever Ct < C ∗ in Eq. (5), a System Two dispatch
can only occur at elevated load, as in Fig. 2.
V. E MPIRICAL E VALUATION
A. Experimental Configuration
We ran an agent-based Monte Carlo simulation of N =
10,000 learners in four equal cohorts of 2,500: (A) university engineering undergraduates, (B) mid-career technical
reskillers, (C) non-technical upskillers, and (D) senior lifelong
learners. Four architectures were benchmarked on a standard
50-module STEM curriculum: (1) a static curriculum, (2) a
rule-based ITS, (3) a monolithic LLM tutor (System Two
only), and (4) the proposed DP-ALS. All latency, token, and
learning-outcome figures in this paper are simulation outputs,
not measurements from a deployed system.
B. Results and Comparative Analysis
Fig. 2 shows an illustrative simulated session in which System One issues micro-nudges and System Two is dispatched
once, and Table I and Fig. 3 summarize the aggregate results.
• Time-to-mastery (TTM). DP-ALS reached mastery in
18.6 h on average, versus 28.4 h for the monolithic LLM
and 48.5 h for the static curriculum (a 61.6% reduction).
Instant micro-nudges keep minor conceptual slips from
compounding into multi-minute halts.
• Cognitive impasse. Impasse rates fell to 6.2%, compared
with 42.1% for the static curriculum (an 85.3% reduction)
and 19.5% for the monolithic LLM. We attribute the latter
to latency: a multi-second wait for each LLM response
degrades attention.
• Token and energy efficiency. By delegating 91.3% of
routine pedagogical decisions to the fast System One
model, token consumption fell from 48,200 to 7,400
tokens per hour, an 84.6% reduction in computational
cost that supports green-computing goals.
• Flow preservation. Sustained flow reached 78.9%, because System One avoids intrusive interruptions while
the learner is in productive struggle.
VI. A LIGNMENT WITH SDG S , K NOWLEDGE P ROFILES ,
AND P ROGRAM O UTCOMES
DP-ALS is mapped to the UN SDGs, to the Washington
Accord knowledge profiles WK1–WK9, and to the program

outcomes of the IEA graduate attributes (version 4, 2021)
[14], whose eleven attributes WA1–WA11 are referred to
here as PO1–PO11. The full mapping is given in Table II.
In brief, the state-space filtering and IRT modeling address
WK2 and PO1/PO2; the System One / System Two architecture addresses WK3, WK5 and PO3; the decision, LLM,
and streaming tooling addresses WK6 and PO5; the Monte
Carlo study addresses PO4; the 84.6% token reduction and
SDG alignment address WK5, WK7 and PO6; client-side privacy safeguards address WK9 and PO7; the compute-versuspedagogy objective addresses PO10; and the Skill Passport
addresses PO11.
VII. C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORK
This paper presented a theoretical framework and cyberphysical realization for continuous education that moves pedagogical systems from episodic instruction to continuous, lifelong adaptation. By pairing a low-latency System One decision
model with a deliberate System Two Socratic LLM, DPALS balances responsiveness, deep personalization, and computational sustainability. Future work will address on-device
neuromorphic System One deployment, federated privacypreserving telemetry aggregation across enterprise consortia,
a fairness audit of adaptive pacing across learner cohorts, and
empirical trials within accredited degree programs.
A PPENDIX A
T ELEMETRY S ERIALIZATION S CHEMA
The client worker transmits binary WebSocket frames of the
form
Frame = ⟨timestampuint64 , ∆τk,float32 , Hk,float32 ,
σscroll,float32 , esyntax,uint8 , tdwell,float32 , rchurn,uint8 ⟩.
The fields total 26 bytes, padded to 28 bytes per message. At
one message per 50 ms this is 0.56 KB/s, enabling high-fidelity
telemetry over constrained mobile links (SDG 9, PO5).
A PPENDIX B
S YSTEM T WO S OCRATIC C ONTEXT I NJECTION T EMPLATE
When an impasse is flagged (Pt < −0.4), the prompt
compiler builds structured context for the generative reasoning
agent:
[SYSTEM CONTEXT: DUAL-PROCESS PEDAGOGICAL
AGENT]
Learner Profile: Mid-Career Professional
(Age 42)
Target Competency: Graph Algorithms
(Dijkstra, WK3/PO1)
State: C_t = 0.82 (High), Flow = 0.12,
Struggle = -0.65
Diagnostic: 3 failed attempts on relaxation
step in 45 s.
DIRECTIVE: Do NOT provide solution code.
Formulate a 2-sentence Socratic question
grounding node relaxation in logistics
routing. Preserve learner agency.

Fig. 2. Illustrative simulated session. System One tracks cognitive load Ct and flow Ft and deploys micro-nudges while load is below τimpasse ; System
Two is dispatched once, when the threshold is first breached.

Fig. 3. Quantitative benchmarks. DP-ALS reduces time-to-mastery by 61.6% versus the static curriculum, cuts impasse to 6.2%, and reduces token consumption
by 84.6% versus the monolithic LLM.

R EFERENCES
[1] Gallagher, “The half-life of a skill: Training the workforce for
an era of digital transformation,” Arthur J. Gallagher & Co.,
Oct. 2025. [Online]. Available: https://www.ajg.com/news-and-insights/
features/half-life-of-a-skill-digital-transformation/
[2] United Nations General Assembly, “Transforming our world: The 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development,” Resolution A/RES/70/1, Sep.
2015.
[3] UNESCO Institute for Lifelong Learning, Making Lifelong Learning a
Reality: A Handbook. Hamburg, Germany: UNESCO UIL, 2022.
[4] K. VanLehn, “The behavior of tutoring systems,” Int. J. Artif. Intell.
Educ., vol. 16, no. 3, pp. 227–265, 2006.
[5] A. T. Corbett and J. R. Anderson, “Knowledge tracing: Modeling
the acquisition of procedural knowledge,” User Model. User-Adapted
Interact., vol. 4, no. 4, pp. 253–278, 1994.
[6] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf.
Process. Syst., vol. 30, 2017, pp. 5998–6008.
[7] BenchLM, “Fastest LLMs by output and first answer,” Oct. 2026
(runtime data from Artificial Analysis, verified Oct. 6, 2026). [Online].
Available: https://benchlm.ai/llm-speed
[8] H. Bastani, O. Bastani, A. Sungu, H. Ge, Ö. Kabakçı, and R. Mariman,
“Generative AI without guardrails can harm learning: Evidence from
high school mathematics,” Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A., vol. 122, no.
26, p. e2422633122, 2025, doi: 10.1073/pnas.2422633122.
[9] M. Csikszentmihalyi, Flow: The Psychology of Optimal Experience.
New York, NY, USA: Harper & Row, 1990.
[10] D. Kahneman, Thinking, Fast and Slow. New York, NY, USA: Farrar,
Straus and Giroux, 2011.

[11] Fastino Labs, “GLiNER2.5-Decide: An open-weight model for structured decision making,” Fastino blog, Sep. 24, 2026. [Online]. Available:
https://fastino.ai/blog/gliner-2-5-decide-open-weight-decision-model
[12] L. P. Kaelbling, M. L. Littman, and A. R. Cassandra, “Planning and
acting in partially observable stochastic domains,” Artif. Intell., vol. 101,
no. 1–2, pp. 99–134, 1998.
[13] J. Sweller, “Cognitive load during problem solving: Effects on learning,”
Cogn. Sci., vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 257–285, 1988.
[14] International Engineering Alliance, “Graduate attributes and professional
competence profiles,” Version 4, Jun. 21, 2021.

TABLE II
ACCREDITATION AND S TANDARDS A LIGNMENT OF DP-ALS (POn = IEA GRADUATE ATTRIBUTE WAn [14])

Framework
UN SDGs

ID

Descriptor

Realization in DP-ALS

SDG 4

Quality and inclusive lifelong
education
Decent work and economic
growth
Industry, innovation, and
infrastructure
Reduced inequalities

Adaptive scaffolding accessible to all age groups; continuous skill acquisition.

SDG 8
SDG 9
SDG 10
WK2

WKs

WK3
WK5
WK6
WK7
WK9
PO1, PO2
PO3

POs

PO4
PO5
PO6
PO7
PO8
PO10
PO11

Mathematics, data analysis,
and statistics
Engineering fundamentals
Engineering design
knowledge, including efficient
resource use
Engineering practice
(technology)
Role of engineering in society;
sustainable development
Ethics, inclusive behavior and
conduct
Engineering knowledge;
problem analysis
Design and development of
solutions
Investigation
Tool usage
The engineer and the world
Ethics
Individual and collaborative
teamwork
Project management and
finance
Lifelong learning

Reskilling and upskilling modules aligned with evolving industrial demands.
AI educational infrastructure that optimizes compute sustainability.
Low-bandwidth telemetry (0.56 KB/s) for constrained mobile links; personalized pacing across age cohorts.
POMDP Bayesian filtering, IRT, and information-theoretic telemetry modeling.
Low-latency client-server architecture, WebSockets, asynchronous pipelines.
Integration of fast reflex AI, generative reasoning, and knowledge graphs;
84.6% lower LLM token consumption.
Edge inference, LLM orchestration, and binary streaming pipelines.
Societal upskilling aligned with SDGs 4, 8, 9, and 10 at a lower compute
footprint.
Client-side privacy-preserving telemetry; adaptive pacing, with a fairness audit
left to future work.
Formal cognitive-state estimation and impasse detection from first principles.
System One / System Two architecture designed around token cost, latency,
and privacy constraints.
Agent-based Monte Carlo study of 10,000 learners with analysis of the results.
Decision models, LLM orchestration, and modeling tools, with the limits of
simulation stated.
Sustainable-development impacts: SDG alignment and reduced compute.
GDPR/FERPA-aware design; no keystroke content captured.
Modular microservices enabling multidisciplinary, distributed development.
Objective that trades pedagogical return against compute cost.
Lifelong competency tracking and micro-credential verification.

